HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
both away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
remembering the
legendary artist known as
Prince, dead at
57.
Also ahead: The campaign moves
into new battleground
states, and we examine the role
of trade in
the 2016 election.
A ballot initiative in
Washington state to
create a carbon pollution tax,
but some environmentalists
oppose it.
IAN TOLLESON, Lobbyist: I would
not disagree
with you that climate is
changing, but this
is a global phenomenon, and it
needs a global
solution. Is it fair to put on
the back of
Washington employers and
families?
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: From rules
governing delegates
to rules governing bathrooms, it
was all part
of this campaign day in the
presidential race.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: At a "Today Show"
town hall this
morning, Donald Trump promised a
kinder, gentler
Republican front-runner.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
It's easier for me to be
presidential than
for me to be doing what I have
been doing
for the last, really, nine
months. But, at
the right time, I will be so
presidential,
you will be so bored.
JOHN YANG: He also stepped into
a contentious
issue, defending the right of
transgender
people to use the bathroom that
matches their
gender identity.
DONALD TRUMP: You leave it the
way it is.
There have been very few
complaints the way
it is. People go. They use the
bathroom that
they feel is appropriate. There
has been so
little trouble.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
This morning, Donald Trump went
on "The Today
Show."
That drew a swift rebuke from
Texas Senator
Ted Cruz, as he stumped in
Maryland, one of
the new primary battlegrounds.
SEN. TED CRUZ: Donald agreed
with Hillary
Clinton and Barack Obama, in
attacking the
state of North Carolina for
passing their
bathroom ordinance. Have we gone
stark raving
nuts? This is the political
correctness. This
is basic common sense.
JOHN YANG: Meanwhile, the
Republican National
Committee met in Hollywood,
Florida, amid
Trump's complaints about party
rules. In a
Google Hangout, the "NewsHour"'s
Daniel Bush
reports the group made no
changes.
DANIEL BUSH: What Sean Spicer,
the RNC's chief
strategist, told me yesterday
was that the
chairman, Reince Priebus,
directed members
here this week not to set new
rules ahead
of the conventions, because the
RNC wants
to avoid a perception that it's
paving the
way for one candidate or another
to get the
nomination.
JOHN YANG: Hillary Clinton,
meanwhile, is
close to wrapping up the
Democratic nomination.
She campaigned in Connecticut,
focusing on
gun control.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm raising it everywhere I go
because we
need a national movement. The
gun lobby is
the most powerful lobby in
Washington.
JOHN YANG: Bernie Sanders
returned to campaigning
in Pennsylvania, after taking a
beating in
the New York primary.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I don't mind losing, but three
million people
in New York state, three million
people who
registered as independents
didn't have the
right to participate in the
Democratic or
Republican primary.
(BOOING)
JOHN YANG: Today, Sanders muted
his criticism
of Clinton today, whose delegate
lead is now
all but insurmountable.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can hear
more online
from Daniel Bush, covering the
Republican
National Committee meeting. And
we will take
a closer look at the primaries
in five states
next Tuesday later in the
program.
In the day's other news:
Aftershocks rocked
Ecuador again, five days after
the country's
worst earthquake in decades. And
the official
death toll ticked steadily
higher, reaching
577. More than 160 people are
still missing
and more than 23,000 are
homeless.
Meanwhile, President Rafael
Correa announced
he's raising the national sales
tax and putting
a one-time levy on millionaires
to pay for
reconstruction.
Volkswagen formally submitted a
plan today
to settle with U.S. customers
over its emissions
cheating scandal. Under the
terms, the German
automaker says it will buy back
the affected
models or fix them, whichever
the owner wants.
In all, some 482,000 customers
of Volkswagen's
diesel-engine cars will be
affected. Details,
including the total amount that
V.W. will
pay, are still being worked out.
Queen Elizabeth celebrated a
milestone birthday
today and thousands paid tribute
to her across
Britain.
Tim Ewart of Independent
Television News wraps
up the day's celebrations.
TIM EWART: The band played, the
sun shone,
well-wishers lined the streets
to offer flowers
and cards. In a town heavy with
royal history,
Britain's 90-year-old monarch
set forth to
meet her people.
Some, the real die-hards, had
slept on this
pavement for two nights to be in
prime position.
She knows these faces well, and
she wasn't
going to disappoint them.
MAN: Three cheers for Her
Majesty!
(CHEERING)
TIM EWART: A statue of Victoria,
the queen's
great-great-grandmother, stands
outside Windsor
Castle. Victoria was once
Britain's oldest
and longest-serving monarch. But
she died
at 81, and Elizabeth passed the
milestone
of longest reign last year.
A group of other 90-year-olds
was assembled
to meet the monarch. Such an age
was once
rare, but no longer. There are
around half-a-million
nonagenarians in England and
Wales. The queen,
though, never fails to impress.
WOMAN: I thought she looked
wonderful, and
I was interested in her makeup,
because she
looked so lovely and smooth. I
was wanting
to ask her what she used.
(LAUGHTER)
TIM EWART: The queen is 90, her
husband nearly
95, but, for all the advancing
years, the
show goes on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Elizabeth
ascended to the
throne in 1952, after the death
of her father,
King George VI.
The man who flew a
mini-helicopter onto the
U.S. Capitol lawn a year ago
this month was
sentenced today. Douglas Hughes
got four months
in prison for piloting a
gyrocopter without
a license. Hughes and his craft
penetrated
some of the nation's most
restricted airspace
before landing at the Capitol.
He said he
was protesting big money in
politics.
Wall Street came back to earth
after a three-day
rally. The Dow Jones industrial
average lost
more than 113 points to close at
17982. The
Nasdaq fell two points, and the
S&P 500 slipped
nearly 11.
And the Olympic Flame was lit
today, starting
the countdown to the 2017 summer
games in
Rio de Janeiro. The ceremony
took place at
the Ancient Stadium in Olympia,
Greece, where
the games originated. An actress
playing a
high priestess lit the torch,
starting it
on a journey to Brazil. The
Games are set
to open on August 5, but they
have been plagued
by delays and political turmoil
in Brazil.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
mourning
a music icon -- Prince dies at
57; a look
ahead to the next primaries and
the fight
over trade along the campaign
trail; Obama
in Saudi Arabia amid tensions in
the relationship
between two longtime allies; and
much more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And now for
more on the
race for the White House.
Voters in five states head to
the polls on
Tuesday. Front-runners Donald
Trump and Hillary
Clinton are hoping Tuesday will
bring them
closer to the necessary
delegates needed to
secure their parties'
nominations.
The "NewsHour"'s John Yang has
the latest.
JOHN YANG: Today, we focus on
two key states
voting next week.
Joining me to talk about the
race in Maryland
is John Fritze of The Baltimore
Sun, and from
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, Karen
Langley of
The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette to
talk about
that state's primary.
Both of these states have
littlest wrinkles
in their ballots.
And, Karen Langley, the biggest
wrinkle may
be in Pennsylvania. When
Republican voters
go into the voting booth next
Tuesday, what
are they going to see?
KAREN LANGLEY, The Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette:
Well, they're going to be voting
for a presidential
candidate, of course.
They will also be voting for
delegates to
send to the Republican National
Convention.
But there is no tie between the
presidential
candidate who is selected by the
state or
its congressional districts and
these delegates
who the congressional districts
will be choosing
on Tuesday.
Those delegates do not have to
commit to supporting
any particular candidate, even
on the first
ballot. And so you could
theoretically have
a presidential candidate win the
state and
not get any of those 54
delegates who will
be selected by the congressional
districts.
JOHN YANG: And how will the
voters know who
these delegates are going to
support? They're
technically unbound, but some of
them are
already saying what they're
going to do.
KAREN LANGLEY: That's right.
So when these delegates have
been asked, and
reporters have been trying to
fig outer what
they would do if they were
selected, some
of them say that they would
support a particular
candidate, at least on the first
ballot. A
large portion of them say that
they would
go the way their congressional
district does,
at least on that first ballot.
And some of them just say that
they will take
into consideration things like
the statewide
winner, the congressional
district winner,
and then who they think would be
most electable
in November.
So, those candidates, as we can
imagine, going
into Cleveland could be coming
under a lot
of lobbying from the
presidential campaigns,
since they they're the ones who
have the majority
of sway, as far as the delegates
from Pennsylvania
are concerned.
JOHN YANG: And in Maryland, John
Fritze, this
is the first time in a long time
that this
state has actually mattered in
the race.
JOHN FRITZE, The Baltimore Sun:
That's absolutely
right.
We have not a competitive
presidential in
Maryland in decades, really. And
while Pennsylvania
is the biggest prize on Tuesday,
I like to
joke that the Maryland delegates
are more
loyal. Our delegates are bound
for the first
two ballots in Cleveland. And
so, you know,
for a candidate coming in and
trying to get
every single delegate, I think
we have perhaps
seen a little more tension
because of that.
If Trump wins a congressional
district in
our state, that -- those three
delegates are
bound for the first two ballots.
JOHN YANG: And also in the -- in
Maryland
on the Democratic side, you have
got the primary
vote really being driven in a
way by lower-level
races, rather than the
presidential race.
JOHN FRITZE: Right, an unusual
twist. Usually,
we talk about top-down effect.
In this state,
we have got two really good
races. We have
got a great Senate race going
on, Democratic
primary.
But we have also got the mayoral
race in Baltimore,
which doesn't get as much
attention in Washington.
It's the first big election in
the city since
the death of Freddie Gray, since
the riots
last year. Huge amount of
interest. And I
expect it's going to -- there's
already indications
that early voting is way up in
the city.
JOHN YANG: And could those races
affect upward,
affect the presidential race?
JOHN FRITZE: I think so. I think
so.
I think if -- for instance, if
you see a huge
African-American turnout in
Baltimore City,
Baltimore is a predominantly an
African-American
city. When we talk about large
turnouts in
Maryland, we are talking about
an increase
in African-American turnout.
That certainly
benefits somebody like Hillary
Clinton, and
it benefits someone like
Congresswoman Donna
Edwards, who is running for
Senate.
Part of her message is that she
would be a
historic figure, because she
would be the
first black woman to represent
the state in
the Senate.
JOHN YANG: Karen Langley, in
Pennsylvania,
what's the state of the race?
What's going
on, on the ground, on each side
in the Republican
and presidential -- Republican
and Democratic
races?
KAREN LANGLEY: Sure.
Well, we're seeing a lot of
appearances by
the candidates, by surrogates
for the candidates.
Yesterday, in Hershey,
Pennsylvania, I was
at a Ted Cruz event. Donald
Trump will be
in town here in Harrisburg later
tonight.
Bill Clinton was in Harrisburg
today.
As far as what we know about the
-- you know,
the polls, both Clinton and
Trump have wide
margins so far. One longtime
observer of state
politics who I spoke with said
that the question
is really not whether those
candidates will
win their respective primaries,
but by how
much.
JOHN YANG: And John Kasich, from
a neighboring
state, born in Western
Pennsylvania, is he
having any impact or getting any
traction?
KAREN LANGLEY: You know, he, in
some surveys,
is right there with Cruz as the
-- you know,
second place to Trump.
I know that when Kasich is in
Pittsburgh,
he certainly talks up his roots
from there.
We have seen an advertisement, I
think not
maybe by him, but by supporters,
that plays
up those Pennsylvania
connections as well.
Some of the Republican voters
who I have talked
to say that they like him, but
that they don't
think that he stands a chance
and, therefore,
won't get their vote.
JOHN YANG: John Fritze, what's
the state of
play in Maryland on both sides?
JOHN FRITZE: It's actually
really relatively
similar.
We have had most of the major
candidates in.
I was at a Donald Trump rally
out on the Eastern
Shore last night. Ted Cruz
announced his second
visit. He was in the state in
Western Maryland
today. So, we have seen a fair
number of candidates.
On the Democratic side, both
Clinton and Bernie
Sanders are on the air
statewide, so they're
running advertising. You know,
the polling
is pretty similar to
Pennsylvania. Certainly,
Clinton in particular has just a
huge increase.
A poll out today from Monmouth
has her up
25 points in Maryland. Maryland
is the kind
of state where Clinton has
tended to do well
in, closed primary, high
African-American
turnout.
So it's really a state that will
be good for
her, I think, if the trends
hold. On the Republican
side, Trump has a pretty
significant margin,
too, but, again, somebody like
Kasich or Cruz
can potentially come in and
steal some delegates
from these congressional
districts in order
to try to slow down Trump as he
tries to get
to the magic number.
JOHN YANG: John Fritze of The
Baltimore sun,
Karen Langley from Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania,
with The Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette, thanks a
lot for being with us.
JOHN FRITZE: Thanks.
KAREN LANGLEY: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As the
candidates campaign
in Pennsylvania, Indiana and
elsewhere, one
of the issues resonating
strongly this year
is trade, and whether it's
helping or hurting
the American economy and its
workers.
It's been a long time since
trade policy played
out this way in a campaign.
This week, our colleagues at NPR
have been
looking more closely at these
issues as part
of an ongoing series of reports
we are jointly
doing about issues on the
campaign trail.
For more on how trade is playing
out in the
race for the White House, I am
joined by Thea
Lee. She's deputy chief of staff
at the AFL-CIO
and an international economist.
And Matthew
Slaughter, dean of the Tuck
School at Dartmouth
College. From 2005 to 2007, he
served on the
Council of Economic Advisers to
President
George W. Bush.
Thea Lee, so, why is this
resonating so much
right now?
THEA LEE, Deputy Chief of Staff,
AFL-CIO:
You know, I think we have hit a
breaking point.
American workers have really not
benefited
from a lot of changes in the
economy over
the last couple of decades. We
have seen that
real wages are essentially flat
for more than
four decades. And so we have had
a period
of tremendous economic growth
and technological
innovation and globalization,
and yet American
workers are working harder than
ever.
They're more educated than ever.
More people
in each family are working, and
they're not
really making ends meet. And
trade has been
a key contributing factor. It's
not the only
factor. It may not even be the
largest factor.
But it is a key policy choice
that we have
made.
And when we have a decision
about a big trade
agreement like the Trans-Pacific
Partnership,
this focuses the attention. And
I think we
have seen candidates really take
advantage
of that attention on trade right
now, and
workers are responding and it's
resonating.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Matthew
Slaughter, any other
reasons that this is catching on
right now?
MATTHEW SLAUGHTER, Associate
Dean, Tuck School
of Business, Dartmouth College:
I think Thea
is right that the American
workers, a lot
of them sitting around their
kitchen tables
thinking about voting, they have
not performed
as well as they had in the past.
They're concerned about their
prospects. They're
concerned about their children.
And yet I
think what's important to keep
in mind is
trade in particular and
globalization more
generally, they have generated
large gains
for America overall over the
many decades.
And with the right kind of
policies going
forward, more global engagement
can help more
American families in the future
as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This isn't
what we're hearing
candidates say from either side
of the aisle,
Thea.
THEA LEE: Right, we have no
major presidential
candidate candidates from either
party right
now that are supporting the
Trans-Pacific
Partnership, for example.
And I think the reason is that
the gains have
actually been relatively small.
And the distributional
consequences have been large.
And on top of
that, we have doubled down. And
instead of
compensating the losers, you
know, taxing
the winners to compensate the
losers, in some
ways, we have done the opposite.
We have cut
tax rates for the wealthy. We
have decimated
the social safety net.
We have gotten rid of education
and training
and infrastructure programs.
It's almost like
we have transpired to make trade
less successful
in the global economy -- in the
U.S. economy
as it affects American workers.
We haven't
done what we needed to do. We
haven't negotiated
the right kind of trade
agreements, and then
we haven't taken the steps in
the domestic
economy that would mitigate the
distributional
consequences and also make sure
that the United
States was truly competitive in
the global
economy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Matthew
Slaughter, so how
come the candidates aren't
singing the praises
that you do of trade?
MATTHEW SLAUGHTER: Well, I think
a lot of
it has to do with politics is
oftentimes very
local. It's long been the case
that international
trade and other dynamic forces
in the U.S.
economy, like technological
change, the benefits
often accrue to many different
companies and
many different communities and
workers in
ways that aren't always
immediately visible.
And yet the forces of dynamic
change like
trade, the losses in those who
don't directly
benefit are oftentimes quite
concentrated
and visible.
And so I think what's a little
concerning
in the current political
environment is, it's
typically presidents, in
particular, who by
definition should be thinking
about the aggregate
economic well-being for America.
We seem to
have lost the narrative of the
benefits that
trade and globalization have
generated for
America.
Those benefits include things
like a spur
to innovation for companies, a
greater return
on the investments they make in
new ideas.
We have long known, for example,
that companies
engaged in exporting, they tend
to pay much
higher wages than do companies
elsewhere in
the U.S. economy.
So, we need to remember in the
current political
conversation the benefits that
globalization
has generated and good
agreements like the
TPP could generate more of in
the future.
Thea is definitely right. We
need to think
about ways to expand and
strengthen the social
safety net, and I think the TPP
is a positive
step forward in that direction.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
what about
the fact that -- the idea that
it takes a
long time to see some of the
benefits?
THEA LEE: Well, it takes -- we
haven't seen
the benefits. American workers
have not seen
the benefits of trade
agreements. That's just
a basic fact.
And in some ways, I think Matt
has the story
exactly wrong, that rather than
benefits being
widespread and the negative
consequences concentrated
in a few workers who lose their
jobs, in fact,
what we're seeing is that
overall, in the
economy, workers are seeing
stagnant and falling
wages.
And so, you know, even the
cheaper prices
that we get from imports and
from trade has
not offset the fact that our job
market is
not delivering those jobs. And
trade has been
a key part of that. We see it in
communities.
Workers feel it every day.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Matthew, let
me let you
give a last response here.
MATTHEW SLAUGHTER: So, it is
well-known that
companies and their workers that
are connected
to the global economy through
trade and international
investment, the academic
research is very
clear. Those tend to be better
jobs on a lot
of dimensions that all voters, I
think, in
America care about.
So, I think the key question
from a policy
perspective is, A, how do we
have smart trade
and investment agreements with
the rest of
the world that allow more
workers to be connected
to the opportunity of the global
economy,
and, at the same time, design a
stronger,
more resilient, better-funded
social safety
net, so that workers, whether
it's through
trade or technological change,
or whatever
dynamic forces, who aren't doing
as well as
they would like in the American
labor market,
we provide more public supports
for those
people to have better
opportunities in the
future?
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Matthew Slaughter,
Thea Lee, thanks so much.
THEA LEE: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: NPR's next
story in the
series A Nation Engaged can be
heard on Saturday
night on "All Things Considered"
with Michel
Martin.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
fighting climate
change by taxing pollution; and
a road map
for success in a world of
rapidly changing
technology.
But, first, President Obama
today held his
second annual summit with Saudi
Arabia and
its Gulf Cooperation Council
allies, Kuwait,
Bahrain, Qatar, Oman, and the
United Arab
Emirates.
They discussed common interests
and issues,
but beneath the show of unity
lies rising
tensions between the U.S. and
Saudi Arabia.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner has the story.
MARGARET WARNER: Beneath the
ornate chandeliers
of Riyadh's Diriyah Palace this
morning, Saudi
King Salman gave flicker of a
smile, as President
Obama outlined steps the U.S.
and Gulf states
were taking to deepen
cooperation on regional
and security challenges.
But their two days of meetings
came amidst
new strains emerging in the
decades-long partnership
between the two countries. The
fundamental
bargain, oil for guns, a
reliable supply of
Saudi oil, in return for U.S.
military protection
and weaponry for the kingdom.
But, today
shale-oil-and-gas-rich America
has less need of Saudi oil. And
with the region
in turmoil, from conflicts in
Syria, Iraq
and Yemen, Islamic State
aggression, oil prices
falling, and a rising Iran, the
original bargain
is fraying.
RANDA SLIM, Middle East
Institute: This relationship
saw its glory days in the 1980s,
1990s. And
since the al-Qaida attacks in
New York on
September 11, 2001, a lot of
mistrust has
seeped into this relationship,
and that breach
has been overcome.
MARGARET WARNER: Randa Slim, an
analyst at
the Middle East Institute, says
each country
feels let down by the other.
RANDA SLIM: The GCC, led by the
Saudis, has
not done enough in the fight
against ISIS.
One factor is that they consider
the major
fight for them is Iran, and not
necessarily
ISIS. The Saudis look at the
Obama administration
as being enthralled with Iran,
and not willing
to stand up to what they
perceive to be subversive
Iranian activities in their
backyard.
MARGARET WARNER: President Obama
sought to
downplay those differences
today.
BARACK OBAMA: A lot of the
strain was always
overblown. During the course of
our administration,
the GCC countries have
extensively cooperated
with us on counterterrorism, on
curbing the
financing of terrorist
activities. They are
part of the ISIL -- counter-ISIL
coalition.
MARGARET WARNER: But the kingdom
has a list
of grievances that have shaken
their confidence,
chief among them, the U.S. did
nothing to
save its longtime Sunni partner,
Egyptian
President Hosni Mubarak, from
being toppled
in the Arab Spring revolt.
BRUCE RIEDEL, Brookings
Institution: The fall
of Mubarak sent the message to
the Saudis
that the United States won't
stand by autocrats
when the people of the country
is demanding
change. It was a shock to the
Saudis.
MARGARET WARNER: Former CIA and
National Security
Council official Bruce Riedel
spent decades
working in the Middle East.
BRUCE RIEDEL: From the Saudis'
standpoint,
they immediately said, what
about us? Are
we going to go the same way?
MARGARET WARNER: Then, last
year, Riyadh felt
betrayed by the Obama
administration's nuclear
deal with its Shiite regional
rival, Iran.
BRUCE RIEDEL: The Saudis and the
other Gulf
states are paranoid that the
United States
is going to shift sides, and
that we're going
to find a new friend in Iran and
dump them.
MARGARET WARNER: And, lately,
the kingdom
is angry about legislation
making its way
through Congress to let 9/11
victims' families
sue Saudi Arabia, home to 15 of
the 19 hijackers.
Washington has grievances too,
top on the
list, that Saudi Arabia's focus
on provoking
its archrival, Iran, as it did
when it beheaded
a Saudi Shiite cleric in
January, fuels sectarian
tensions in the region. That
makes it harder
to unite against America's
number one foe,
the Islamic State.
After joining the U.S.-led anti-
ISIS coalition
in 2014, the Saudis made bombing
runs against
the terrorist group in Iraq and
Syria, but
those have stopped. Instead,
Riyadh is using
billions of dollars in U.S.
plane and weapons
sales to fight a proxy war
against Iranian-backed
Houthi rebels in Yemen.
SEN. CHRIS MURPHY (D),
Connecticut: The humanitarian
casualties of this war have been
catastrophic.
MARGARET WARNER: Democratic
Senator Chris
Murphy of Connecticut, a member
of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, has
introduced
a bill to put conditions on U.S.
arms sales
to the Saudis, saying their use
undercuts
America's image and interests.
SEN. CHRIS MURPHY: Inside Yemen,
this isn't
a Saudi bombing campaign. This
is a U.S.-Saudi
bombing campaign.
MARGARET WARNER: Because it's
done with American
weaponry.
SEN. CHRIS MURPHY: It's done
with American
weaponry. It's done with
American targeting.
It's done with American
refueling of planes.
MARGARET WARNER: And he faults
the Saudis
for letting ISIS and al-Qaida
actually expand
in Yemen.
SEN. CHRIS MURPHY: We also know
for a fact
that the Saudis have not been
targeting either
of those groups inside this
civil war.
MARGARET WARNER: President Obama
expressed
impatience with Riyadh's rivalry
with Iran
in a recent interview with "The
Atlantic"
magazine, saying Saudi leaders
"need to find
an effective way to share the
neighborhood
and institute some sort of cold
peace with
Iran, not count on the U.S. to
back them in
endless proxy wars."
Saudi leaders made it clear that
comment didn't
sit well with them. U.S.-Saudi
strains are
most pronounced over handling
the civil war
in Syria with its multiple
players, Iranian-backed
President Bashar Assad, the
Islamic State
and other terror groups, and
Western-backed
rebels.
Saudi Arabia has funded the
training and equipping
of anti-Assad rebels, but, of
late, not done
much more to defeat ISIS there.
RANDA SLIM: Saudi Arabia doesn't
believe this
is going to be achieved without
removing Assad
from power, and that is where
the goals differ.
MARGARET WARNER: And then there
is the greatest,
but rarely spoken of point of
friction, the
Saudis funding of Sunni mosques
and schools
that spread their fundamentalist
strain of
Islam, Wahhabism, throughout the
Muslim world.
SEN. CHRIS MURPHY: If you want
to look at
the roots of al-Qaida, if you
want to look
at the roots of ISIL, there's no
way of denying
that part of those roots run
through the export
of Wahhabism from Saudi Arabia.
MARGARET WARNER: Yet, with the
two nations
still needing each other, as
long as the Saudi
monarchy is in power, no one
predicts a breakup
any time soon.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Global leaders
will gather
at the U.N. tomorrow to sign a
landmark agreement
aimed at limiting climate
change, and it's
happening, not coincidentally,
on Earth Day.
But many observers say those
actions will
not be enough. In Washington
state, there's
a battle over taking a big step
and whether
to approve the first tax on
carbon in the
U.S.
"NewsHour" economics
correspondent Paul Solman
has the story, part of his
weekly reporting,
Making Sense, which airs every
Thursday.
YORAM BAUMAN, Economist: You
might be an economist
if you don't read human interest
stories because
they don't interest you.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: At Seattle's museum
of flight
a couple weeks ago, the annual
Climate Night
event, headlining, Yoram Bauman,
the world's
first and only stand-up
economist.
YORAM BAUMAN: You might be an
economist if
you have ever gone into a bank
or other financial
institution in the hopes of
getting a date.
(LAUGHTER)
YORAM BAUMAN: If you adamantly
refuse to sell
your children because you think
they will
be worth more later.
PAUL SOLMAN: But these days,
Bauman's leading
a dead serious fight, to combat
climate change
in his home state of Washington,
by using
a basic principle of economics.
YORAM BAUMAN: Which is that the
way to get
less pollution is to make
polluting expensive,
because, if you make pollution
expensive,
you get market forces working to
promote conservation,
innovation, development of new
technologies,
all the things that I as an
economist love
about capitalism.
PAUL SOLMAN: And the way to make
carbon-based
greenhouse gas pollution more
expensive, says
Bauman, is to tax it. So, he
founded a grassroots
group, Carbon Washington, to put
the issue
to voters.
MAN: Initiative 732, it's going
to be on the
November ballot.
MAN: I-732 works by charging
polluters with
a carbon fee, which lowers
pollution.
WOMAN: And then the revenue that
is created
will go to reducing other taxes
in the state.
PAUL SOLMAN: Making the carbon
tax, starting
at $25 per ton of CO2, about 25
cents per
gallon of gasoline,
revenue-neutral.
YORAM BAUMAN: The revenue from
the carbon
tax goes to cut existing taxes.
Most of it
goes to cut the state sales tax
by a full
percentage point. Most
households are going
to pay a few hundred dollars a
year more for
fossil fuels and a few hundred
dollars a year
less for everything else.
PAUL SOLMAN: Everyone will pay
the carbon
tax, says Bauman; everyone gets
the sales
tax cut. But two groups get a
bonus.
YORAM BAUMAN: One of those
groups is manufacturers
who are competing with
businesses outside
of the state.
PAUL SOLMAN: They will get the
state business
tax eliminated. And low income
households,
who might be especially hurt by
higher gas
taxes, will get a tax rebate.
YORAM BAUMAN: It's going to
provide up to
$1,500 a year for 400,000
working families
in Washington state. And that is
how we are
going to do our part to save the
world.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, is a
revenue-neutral carbon
tax how the world will
eventually cope with
climate change via economics? Or
is it just
another tree-hugger's quixotic
quest?
Well, in Washington, the fight
has produced
some odd alliances, although
there's nothing
surprising about business'
opposition.
Ian Tolleson is a lobbyist for
food processors
in the Pacific Northwest.
IAN TOLLESON, Lobbyist: We heat
things, we
cut things, we wash, and this is
all for food
safety. And that requires a lot
of energy,
tax, tax, tax all through the
supply chain.
And what that does, our products
are now more
expensive on the shelf. And how
can we compete
with those producers that
wouldn't have this
tax?
PAUL SOLMAN: We met up with
Tolleson at Seattle's
Pike Place Market, which
features, among other
attractions, the world's
presumably first
and only Hula-Hoop,
guitar-on-chin-balancing
troubadour.
But isn't Tolleson at all
worried about global
warming?
I am sitting here sweating in
Seattle in April.
I'm not saying that proves
climate change,
but it certainly suggests that
something is
going on.
IAN TOLLESON: I won't disagree
with you that
climate is changing, but this is
a global
phenomenon, and it needs a
global solution.
Is it fair to put that on the
back of Washington
employers and families?
PAUL SOLMAN: Moreover, says
Tolleson:
IAN TOLLESON: We already have
the fourth cleanest
economy in the whole United
States.
PAUL SOLMAN: Case in point, the
harvester
just around the corner.
EMILY CRAWFORD, Pike Place
Market: It turns
food waste into organic liquid
fertilizer.
PAUL SOLMAN: Pike Place's Emily
Crawford.
EMILY CRAWFORD: We have 20
different vendors
putting their food scraps into
the harvester,
which can process more than
4,000 pounds of
food scraps every day, which the
EPA has shown
is one of the biggest causes for
carbon emissions
in the United States, is food
waste.
PAUL SOLMAN: Siding against the
carbon tax
and with big business, its usual
adversary,
the unions, though State Labor
Council president
Jeff Johnson says he too is an
ardent environmentalist.
JEFF JOHNSON, President,
Washington State
Labor Council: During the
winter, we have
been struck with repeated floods
and mudslides.
In the summer, we have droughts
and forest
fires. Our shellfish industry
has left the
state and gone to Hawaii because
the acid
levels in the ocean has risen so
much.
PAUL SOLMAN: But doesn't that
mean that you
should embrace anything that
would help climate
change and counteract it?
JEFF JOHNSON: No, it doesn't,
particularly
if you embrace a measure that's
actually going
to send us down the wrong path.
We have got
an energy-intensive company,
Kaiser Aluminum
out in Spokane, eastern side of
our state.
It's the most efficient aluminum
rolling mill
in the world, right?
With just a carbon price, they
become less
competitive with aluminum makers
in other
parts of the states, in other
parts of the
world.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that's the key
issue for
a labor leader, right? You're
always trying
to protect jobs?
JEFF JOHNSON: I'm trying to
protect jobs of
the individuals, but also the
revenues of
the community in Spokane, and
we're trying
to keep the most, the world's
most efficient
aluminum producer in our state,
rather than
them moving or shutting down.
PAUL SOLMAN: What does that
shirt say?
JILL MANGALIMAN, Executive
Director, Got Green:
Oh, yes, this is where -- we're
Got Green.
We are a community-based
organization in South
Seattle led by people of color.
PAUL SOLMAN: Business and labor
are strange
enough bedfellows. But why is
environmental
organizer Jill Mangaliman
opposing the carbon
tax?
JILL MANGALIMAN: This is a great
opportunity
for us to actually put something
back into
the communities who are -- who
have been struggling
for so long, historically.
Without any kind
of targeted revenue, business
can continue
as usual, and that's not what we
want.
PAUL SOLMAN: Instead of
revenue-neutral, Mangaliman
wants revenue-targeted to groups
like Got
Green and the economically
stressed constituents
they serve. So, a curious
coalition is con.
But look who's popping up pro.
You're a conservative policy
guy. How come
you're in favor of a carbon tax?
TODD MYERS, Washington Policy
Center: Anything
that moves environmental policy
away from
regulation, which is very
high-cost and ineffective,
toward a personal incentive,
which is more
effective, is a good thing.
PAUL SOLMAN: Todd Myers, a
right-winger, pushing
the revenue-neutral carbon
initiative.
TODD MYERS: It provides an
incentive to be
more efficient, to have less
impact on the
environment, but, at the same
time, doesn't
increase taxes, doesn't waste
money on regulation,
doesn't harm the environment.
PAUL SOLMAN: By contrast, fellow
supporter
Jason Puracal is a man of the
left.
What was it like to spend two
years in prison
in Nicaragua?
JASON PURACAL, Carbon
Washington: Well, it
was horrific conditions. That's
for sure.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now safe in Seattle
with his
family, Puracal is an
environmental activist,
imprisoned in Nicaragua in 2010
on trumped-up
charges, later dropped.
JASON PURACAL: My family had to
launch an
international campaign to save
my life, and
ultimately succeeded with the
support of thousands
of people from around the world.
That case
basically inspired, how do we do
change at
a greater level, at a policy
level?
PAUL SOLMAN: You mean that your
wrongful imprisonment
in Nicaragua has impelled you to
join this
revenue-neutral carbon tax
initiative?
JASON PURACAL: Yes. It's great
to put a price
on carbon and try to move us
away from fossil
fuels, but how do we do so in a
way that's
equitable for all?
PAUL SOLMAN: So, the lower sales
tax will
offset higher gas costs, with an
annual rebate
further softening the blow for
low-income
families.
But if people stop using carbon,
take a drastic
change...
JASON PURACAL: Which is the
intention, right?
PAUL SOLMAN: ... then there will
be less revenue.
JASON PURACAL: At some point in
the future,
yes, there will have to be some
renegotiations
on where that revenue comes
from, if we are
able to transition off of fossil
fuels altogether,
which would be a great problem
to have.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the moment,
though, Seattle
is experiencing midsummer days
in early spring.
The fish are jumping. Some
locals are high.
And the carbon tax is polling 44
percent for,
46 percent against with seven
months to go.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
economics
correspondent Paul Solman,
reporting from
balmy Seattle.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now: how to
make your way
through the future world of ever
rapidly changing
technology.
That's the theme of the newest
addition to
the PBS Bookshelf.
Judy Woodruff recorded this
conversation recently
with an entrepreneur who has
some suggestions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in 1985,
when Steve Case
co-founded America Online, only
3 percent
of Americans were actually
online. Fast-forward
some 30 years, and we can see
the global change
brought about by the Internet
and an ever-growing
array of devices and social
media.
So, what is next?
Well, we get a glimpse from
Steve Case himself.
He is the author of a new book,
"The Third
Wave: An Entrepreneur's Vision
of the Future."
Steve Case, it is good to see
you.
STEVE CASE, Co-Founder, AOL:
It's good to
see you again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you borrowed
that term the
third wave from the futurist
Alvin Toffler.
STEVE CASE: Yes.
When I was in college in the
1980, I read
Toffler "Third Wave." It
completely mesmerized
me inspired me. I spent the last
almost four
decades pursuing some of the
ideas he talked
about.
So, when I was writing a book, I
wanted to
pay respect to him. I open the
book with talking
about my experience reading
Toffler. And I
hope others will similarly be
inspired by
my book, and because the future
once again
is going to change, and the path
forward is
going to be different than what
we saw in
the last two waves. And that's
what I was
trying to lay out in this book.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, in a
thumbnail, first wave
was the creation of the
Internet, which you
were involved in. Second wave
was building
on that, you describe, social
media devices
and so forth.
What is the next wave?
STEVE CASE: It's really
integrating the Internet
seamlessly throughout our lives.
And there is a lot of things
that haven't
changed that much in the first
wave or the
second wave. How we learn, our
kids learn
is about the same. How we stay
healthy is
about the same. How we manage
energy is about
the same. Even how we think
about food is
about the same.
And work itself is starting to
change in the
third wave because of the
freelance economy,
what some call the gig economy.
So, I think
it's important for everybody,
not just businesspeople
or technologists, to understand
what is happening
next. And that is what I try to
lay out in
this book with sort of a -- a
little bit of
a road map forward and a little
bit of a playbook
in terms of how you can think
about orchestrating
your career and your life, and
how you think
about maybe your kids and even
your grandkids.
What world are they going to be
inheriting?
JUDY WOODRUFF: You write about
your experiences
even before AOL, bumpy in the
beginning, very
high, and then there was the
ride down, and
on to what you are doing now.
What are the lessons of that
experience for
the future, do you think?
STEVE CASE: Well, I think
revolutions often
happen in evolutionary ways.
AOL was a 10-year-in-the-making
overnight
success. We really were at it
for a long time
before we finally broke through.
After we
merged with Time Warner, we kind
of lost some
of our way. And what I try to
lay out in the
book is a framework to think
about what is
happening next and make sure you
are focused
on the right priorities, you do
have the right
people.
And entrepreneurship really is a
team sport.
So, if you don't have the right
people kind
of working on the projects in a
collaborative
way, you can't really get a lot
of traction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What were some of
the mistakes?
STEVE CASE: Early on, I thought
it would happen
faster, frankly. I really did
believe in the
idea of the Internet when it was
still pretty
nascent.
And I thought everybody would
understand that.
And it really took us more than
a decade before
we really got traction. Later
on, as we got
bigger and we went from dozens
of people to
hundreds of people to thousands
of people,
and then after the merger, tens
of thousands
of people, kind of lost sight of
some of the
importance of culture and...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was the Time
Warner merger.
And full disclosure, I was
working for CNN
then, so I was one of people
affected by that.
STEVE CASE: You were.
And so -- but, basically, as it
got bigger,
it was -- the culture changed
and some of
the focus in terms of different
people and
their priorities kind of
changed. Ultimately,
my takeaway from that -- and
Thomas Edison
said this more than a century
ago.
Vision without execution is
hallucination.
Having the idea is important,
but being able
to execute against the idea is
more important.
That ultimately comes down to
people and trust
and kind of getting people to
work together
in a collaborative way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Give us a better
sense of what
you mean by the Internet of
everything, which
is what you're saying it's going
to be?
Because, right now, people think
of the Internet,
and they think about the device
they carry
around in their hand or that
YouTube video
or something, participating in
social media.
But you're saying it is going to
be embedded
in the way we live, in our
education, in health
care, in everything.
STEVE CASE: The third wave is
really much
more of an invisible Internet.
And people do talk about the
Internet of things,
which are devices and sensors to
track health
and energy and things like that.
And that
will be part of it, but as this
really cuts
across all aspects of our lives,
and really
cuts across all industries in
the economy,
it really is going to be much
bigger than
the Internet of things, which is
why talk
about it as sort of the Internet
of everything.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How are we
changing as people,
do you think, because of the
Internet?
STEVE CASE: It's amazing to see
what has happened
in the last 30 years, in terms
of how it's
empowered people, not just in
this country,
but all around the world.
But, in the third wave, I think
it's going
to take the next step. And as
you really think
about how do you learn
differently, how do
your kids learn differently, not
everybody
learns the same way. And we kind
of teach
them the same way. So more
personalized, adaptive
approaches to learning is going
to be part
of that.
And health, there are different
ways to stay
healthy, different ways to
manage chronic
disease, different ways to think
about life-threatening
diseases. Right now, it is a
little bit too
one size fits all. I actually
think the third
wave is going to be the most
striking in terms
of really impact on people's
lives, impact
on society, as well as the
impact on business.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you see
maintaining the
human component in that, that
people are still
going to have human
relationships, that they
are going to have time for each
other?
STEVE CASE: I think maybe more
so in the third
wave, because some of the things
like education,
it could be a more personalized
experience
around learning based on your
interest and
your best way to learn.
In health, similarly, it can be
a more personalized
approach to understanding your
own issues
and what opportunities you have
or what risks
you have and dealing with that
in a much more
personalized kind of way.
Entrepreneurs are not just
Silicon Valley
or New York City or Boston. It's
starting
to happen all across the
country, particularly
young impact entrepreneurs that
want to build
businesses, not just focused on
profit, but
focused on purpose. And they
want to focus
on creating jobs, so there is
this passion
about in the third wave taking
it to the next
level.
I am very excited and very
optimistic about
that future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last question. Is
everybody
going to be able to participate
in this, or
is there going to be sort of the
haves who
have got all the technology and
those who
are left behind and are going to
be much slower
to realize it?
STEVE CASE: Well, even 30 years
ago, when
we got started and virtually
everybody was
disconnected, we were really
concerned as
it grew about the digital
divide. How do you
make sure everybody is
connected?
That is going to be a challenge
in the third
wave as well. But some of that
is also democratizing
access to entrepreneurship, so
anybody with
an idea has a shot, so the rise
of the rest
I think will help level that
playing field.
Inclusive entrepreneurship will
help level
that playing field, different
kinds of entrepreneurs
with different kind of ideas
challenging the
status quo, saying there is a
better way,
and using the third wave as a
new paradigm
to think about the future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Steve Case still
thinking about
the future.
The book is "The Third Wave: An
Entrepreneur's
Vision of the Future."
Thank you very much for coming
in.
STEVE CASE: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally
tonight, we want
to leave you once more with
Prince at his
best. During his 2004 induction
into the Rock
and Roll Hall of Fame, Prince
played a guitar
solo during a rendition of
"While My Guitar
Gently Weeps," alongside Tom
Petty and Steve
Winwood, part of a tribute to
the Beatles'
George Harrison.
On his passing, the museum said
of Prince
-- quote -- "He rewrote the
rules, taking
the traditions of funk, soul,
hard rock and
dance to forge his own sound."
(MUSIC)
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.